Uh, good morning everybody.
Uh, we now move, um, to a hearing
of evidence with, um, statistics New Zealand.
Uh, so essentially this is under the, um, umbrella of our
briefing on accountability settings for outcomes for Maori.
And what we've been doing over the course of, um,
some months is just, um, yeah, uh, having hearings
with different, uh, agencies, organizations with respect to,
um, public sector agencies being held
to account when it comes to outcomes, um, with Maori.
So we have you today for half an hour.
Um, I'd like to welcome general manager, Simon
and, uh, of data operations and infrastructure.
Anna McDowell, general Manager of Strategic Engage,
strategic Engagement, Maori Partnerships and Outcomes,
and Sean, general Manager
of Statistical Delivery Population and Housing.
Would you like to give us a bit of an intro
and then we can have a bit of a, um, question
and answer our time?
Absolutely. Um, so Koto and us to be here today.
Um, so as I understand it, we are here to sort
of provide an overview of critical data needed
for the census and social investments.
Um, so in my area of stats, um, we look
after the integrated data infrastructure, the IDI, um,
more than happy to give a brief overview of that, if
that's useful before talking about
data for social investments. Very
Brief just for PIN for balance
As well. So, integrated data
infrastructure is a research database
that holds de-identified information
about people and households.
Um, and access to it is within the Stats n Secure Data Lab,
um, how the data in the IO is used.
It's used for research analysis
and evaluation by government departments, NGOs, academics
and research service providers.
And that's to inform decision making by ministers,
by government departments, NGOs,
and their understanding of value in their clients
and their communities and by other data users
and the evidence they produce.
And in terms of, there's lots of data
that comes into the IDI,
it comes from government departments, it comes from NGOs,
and then it's integrated together
so you can understand the kind of, um, health outcomes of,
um, well anybody.
And you can understand, educate as you outcomes of people
who perhaps, um, have poor health outcomes.
So it's the, the power of it is in the data
that's brought together from all the different sectors.
And, you know, because of this data, um,
and the sensitivity of it, we have, um, a couple
of key frameworks that keep it safe.
One is five safe, which is really the
rules about using the data.
And the other one is ing, which is the sort
of our ethics approach to evaluating research applications.
Thank you. Um, in terms of the, the importance
of the IDI for social investment
and the critical data, there's really three types of data
that are critical for social investment.
So demographic data, the characteristics of people,
particularly people who are, um, at risk of poor outcomes
data to identify needs.
So outcomes for those who are most at risk
and what they're likely to experience, and therefore where
and when to intervene to avoid poor outcomes.
And then the data about those service outcomes.
So the quality and effectiveness of services
and the outcomes for people who use those services.
So currently the IDI is stronger since coverage
of demographic data and data to identify need.
There's quite a lot of crossover
between the administrative data that we bring into the IDI
for research and the data that's needed, uh,
for social investment and the
data that's needed for the census.
Um, but Sean will talk in a minute about the data for census
in terms of bringing data into the IDI
for social investments.
Um, one of the things we've identified rather than
necessarily lots of new data sets, um, it's been important
to identify existing data sets
that would be more useful if they were updated more
frequently or if we had more recent data.
And so that's certainly a focus
for stats in bringing that data in.
One of the biggest gaps we have at the moment is data
about service outcomes.
And 'cause of that we're working closely
with the social investment agency
and went to puny, uh, to bring in data from NGOs
and from AU Water program.
So integrating more data about service services delivered
by NGOs helps us understand what happens to those cohorts
of people and then tracking
their outcomes through the other data.
The I, um, a few months ago,
minister Willis announced the creation
of the social investment fund part of this year's budget.
Um, so the Social Investment Agency anticipate up
to 20 outcomes based contracts being signed
and stats is prioritizing integration of data,
following those contracts into the IDI.
Um, and we're also taking in data following the new
contracting approach for Funnel Water, um,
which is also aligned to the social investment model.
And so there are, I think 169 funnel water providers
for commissioning agencies,
and we've signed data sharing agreements to bring
that data into the IDI.
Sure. Thank you.
Morning Koto.
Um, I thought I'd just touch on the census,
the new census model briefly to sort of set the scene.
Uh, in June, 2025, uh,
following cabinet endorsement Minister of Statistics
and the government statistician announced the, uh, details
of how the New Zealand census of population
and dwellings would be conducted in the future.
Uh, and the new approach is built in three main components,
uh, first one being administrative or admin data.
Um, and that's in a way where census data
and statistics will be produced, prioritizing the use
of those data sources.
Um, it's effectively the foundation
of your new census model,
and it reduces the need for everyone in the TU
to fill out a survey on Census day.
Um, the second component is a new annual sample survey
census attribute survey
that helps verify the accuracy of admin data.
It also collects additional information
that is misrepresented underrepresented
or not available in admin data.
So there's some communities
that don't show up in those data sources
that you still need surveys.
Uh, for the third component is tailored solutions.
Uh, it's effectively stats nz working with Iwi Maori
and priority communities to develop solutions
to help meet their data needs and aspirations.
So there your three basic components.
Um, I guess more specifically,
admin data is already doing a lot of the heavy lifting.
Um, it provides in some cases better coverage than surveys.
And when it comes to counting the population, not describing
but counting the population,
it is the best tool we have, right?
It is better than your traditional model, um,
of a survey of everyone in the country.
Um, we already have strong admin data for, uh, I guess a lot
of key census topics.
So some examples might be, uh, age birthplace,
how long someone has been an T or New Zealand, uh,
and income, if you're thinking about tax records,
benefit data and other other sources.
Um, and we c we are confident that we can produce quality
statistics, uh, in those types of topics
and areas using the admin data first approach.
Um, I think when it comes to admin data,
it's not about relying on one single source.
Uh, you're integrating data from multiple sources, uh,
for different census variables.
So if you take something like ethnicity, uh,
people show up in more than one data set
and nearly everyone shows up somewhere.
And we use statistical techniques and rules to combine
or integrate those data sources
and choose the most reliable value
or values for each person.
'cause you might identify
as more than one ethnicity, for example. Sorry
To interrupt you. Can you give
us a few examples of, um, those data sources?
You, you can have, um, so if you're thinking about income,
that could be your tax records from Inland Revenue, uh,
you could be thinking about, I guess your national health,
uh, index, um, data set from Ministry
of Health could be benefits data from Ministry
of Social Development.
Um, it could be enrollment data from the education sector.
It's quite, quite varied.
Um, and it's depending on different interactions with, uh,
public services over a lifetime.
Thank you. Um, we are actively, uh, improving the data
and we're exploring new admin data sources, uh, at present.
Um, the trick there though is
that it's a whole of government effort.
Uh, it's not something that Stats NZ can do, uh, alone.
Um, it requires a lot
of collaboration across
different agencies and Crown entities.
Uh, and in some cases you might need, uh,
I guess formal levers to help drive that work
and set clear expectations around, uh,
data standards and, and adoption.
Um, so we, I guess to that end, we've been working
with a core group of agencies to develop a list
of the most relevant and valuable data sources, uh,
for census variables.
And we're working towards, um,
developing an admin data supply plan effectively.
And that's setting out which variables need improvement
by way of their quality
and consistency of collection, uh,
where we might need new data supplies, uh,
and where that the plan also sets out which data sets which
variables and which agencies will supply them
and when the changes are needed
and the timeframes for delivering those improvements.
So they're not all gonna be instantaneous.
It's gonna be a gradual progression.
So the Minister of Statistics is intending to take that plan
to cabinet in early to mid 2026, um,
and it'll feature, uh, core census demographic variables.
And we haven't got all of the details nailed down yet.
You've got, I guess, live, um, you know, collaboration
and deliberations going on with different agencies,
but we expect to see things like usual residence address.
Um, so if you're thinking about that in the context
of university students
and still using their parents' home address, for example,
um, thinking about, uh, your most detailed ethnicity.
Um, so I guess, uh, think about that instead
of collecting it at a, say Pacific people's level at sort
of individual Pacific Island nation level, um, gender,
uh, and Maori descent as well.
I guess thinking about Maori descent, we are confident
that we can produce good quality statistics from admin data
sources on that topic,
but we know that there are gaps in coverage when you think
about Maori that are born overseas, in particular Australia,
and how you go about collecting that data, um,
through different mechanisms if it's a New Zealand traveler
decoration or other sources. I'll stop there.
Thank you. Uh, yes. Um, Gregory,
I would like To ask you Yeah, just can you just, um,
um, extrapolate on that last one a little bit,
just expand on, so we are looking to
include in the data set, um, people
who are not New Zealand residents,
So resident, they might,
they might not be New Zealand
residents at this point in time.
So they might be, uh, STR residents
and um, we need to understand if they are,
if they f**k up Papa Maori.
So you might look to collect that data as they come into Al
or New Zealand through the New Zealand Traveler declaration
and take up residence here.
So that's, that's a, that's a gap that we have.
Oh, I see. But we, so we're saying,
but we'd only start, we'd only include them in the
data set once they're actually
Resident in new, correct? Correct. Yes. Yeah.
Cool. So we know we've got really good coverage from,
let's say, when births are registered.
Yes. Um, and,
but we know there's a gap, um, for where we've got, um,
people of Mari descent who weren't born in New Zealand
but are residing in New Zealand.
Gotcha. Yeah. Okay, thanks.
So thank you Greg.
Um, so actually Anna, let's, um, segue to you, um,
give us a bit of an intro
and then we'll go into, um, deeper questions.
I was here more for questions, so yes,
there's absolutely nothing I need to add to that.
Um, just help out with questions
unless there is anything specific that you'd like
to know about other
collaborative approaches that we're taking.
Otherwise, happy just to, to,
um, work through your questions
And colleagues open to the floor.
Then Adrian,
Just on that topic, I just wanted to know, um, sort
of like what level of detail do you go to?
Do you get down into Hapu or just Iwi level?
So, um, iwi iwi affiliation, uh, in terms
of admin data collection is one variable
where we know we need to, um, do some work.
Uh, we need to work across, uh, government agencies
and entities and also particularly with, uh,
our I and Maori partners.
Um, and, and so that's one area where we are now gonna have
to come up with a plan, uh, for how we develop, uh, the,
the capture of iwi affiliation
information and the new census
Approach Is, uh, just a supplementary on that, is, does
that include working
with those particular iwi sharing data?
'cause that some of them have pretty good data,
others not so much?
Yeah, so there is, um, yeah,
there's variability in the capture across the country.
So not only in in government but also with iwi themselves.
Um, we already work with a number of iwi on, um,
building the data capability that, that they have
and that in relation to the aspirations that they have,
we'll continue to do that work
and as we can make sure that that's relevant
for them in the census context as well.
So I think, um,
all those avenues are certainly being looked at
and we'd want to make sure that we take any
of those opportunities that we can.
Thank you. That's okay. Um, any other,
Yeah, I was just wondering if you could give us an example
of where the admin data would potentially be insufficient
to capture the information you're looking for
and the degree of confidence
that the other options survey data, for example,
could potentially capture it.
'cause obviously there's a risk here that people might fall
through the gaps if they're not capturing admin data.
Is it reasonable to expect we can capture in other ways,
or are they also going to be more difficult
to capture in that context? Yeah,
I'll, I'll give a broad example.
Um, and I'll go back to I guess your most granular ethnicity
and broad in the sense that
it is collected in different ways across government
departments and, and crown entities.
So we want to get to a point where you have consistency, um,
in its collection, uh, what we call at the level four level.
So that's your most granular level.
And then you also, part of
that standard is people having an opportunity to identify
with, I think, um, up to six ethnicities, right?
And so at present you might have, um,
that standard adopted in say, uh, an education sector.
Um, you might have a slightly different, uh, variation of
that in different parts of the health sector.
Um, and it could be, um, you know, it could be, uh,
you know, to, to a good quality and say MSD or
or something like that at present.
But the point is you want to work towards that, uh,
consistency and standardization, um, where your,
where data collection, uh, through those, I guess public,
uh, interactions with services is, is consistent.
Um, and then you have, I guess that flowing through, uh,
to the likes of the IDI for uses around research,
social investment and, and census.
And so are there areas where you feel
that won't be captured
or, sorry, I, I guess perhaps aside from that,
what I'm interested in is whether your view is the greater
concern is not being able to capture
complete data across those in terms
of variability of how it's reported.
Or is it actually that there may be people
that miss out entirely from reporting at all
in any of these data sets?
'cause obviously that's a risk under the
current census model.
Is there form at all?
And we don't know they exist necessarily, so That's right.
Is it that risk of hey,
we're not capturing someone in their entirety,
or we're capturing lots of people
but only partial dataset? Yeah,
I guess that comes back to the point
that we're not reliant on a, a single admin data source.
Yes. Right. So you're integrating multiple sources to ensure
that you've got, uh, as good a coverage as, um, you can,
you can possibly achieve.
And then you can couple that with your survey data sources.
You can couple that with, uh, historical census data sets,
um, although they do lose value over time.
And then you've got statistical techniques to, um,
around imputation to help address your gaps as well.
So by the time you work through those different data sources
and those different statistical techniques, you end up
with a good quality coverage for these different, um, topics
and variables that come out of census.
Okay. Can I add a little bit? Yeah, of course.
Um, so I think the three component parts
of the new approach are really important too.
'cause your question is really valid.
So, and in the traditional census model, you know, we were,
we were already worried about groups in the population
that we weren't necessarily capturing as best
or that to the level that we know we need to.
Um, and I think that's, um,
really important in the new approach is we will still need
to have a very keen eye on that,
and that would will be where a lot of effort goes.
Um, and the three different component parts of the model,
so the admin data, the annual, uh, sample survey,
and the tailored solutions,
which we haven't arrived at exactly what those are yet,
because we want to be able to work through that with
agencies and with, uh, the communities that we know need
to be captured in there.
And, and so the three component
parts together will work together.
And I think the other really useful thing about this new
approach is the train doesn't leave the station
once every five years.
So we will have opportunities on an annual basis
or sort of over two to three years
where we are looking at different collections
or different ways in which we're capturing data,
different ways to partner to, um,
to make sure we've got that information.
So the opportunities are there, there will be challenges
that we'll have to work through,
but we are really looking forward to
how we can work differently
and more flexibly, um, to be able to address some of those,
those potential challenges.
Thank you. Pardon? 1 0 1, uh, a quick one.
Yeah. Just interested if you could give us some initial
insights on we, you think those challenge points will be,
you know, what's the sort of technical
or sorry, tailored solutions or,
or survey data that you might have
to really focus on capturing that wouldn't
otherwise be available through the admin data?
I think that probably comes back
to the priority communities
that we're focused on supporting at least, um, up
until 2030, at which point we'll review communities, um,
we are collaborating with,
and so we've got our Iwi Maori partners obviously, um,
but we've got Pacific peoples there.
Um, I guess I mentioned that in the context
of collecting detailed ethnicity data, we've got, uh,
disabled communities, right?
They're not all of those communities not, uh,
present in admin data.
So you still need surveys, um, to,
to understand those groups of people.
You've got LBTQ Plus or our Rainbow communities.
Um, and hence I guess working towards, uh, better adoption
of the sex, um, gender variations
of sex characteristics, data standard.
Uh, we've got homelessness and transient, um, people.
Uh, so we, we, I guess when you're thinking about those
priority communities and then some
of the tailored solutions that we're exploring.
So in a, in a, I guess disability, uh, persons, uh, context,
we are working with FA Kaha on a, um,
disability data framework.
And that was, I think in response
to a concluding observation out
of the United Nations convention, um, for rights, uh,
for people with disabilities.
Um, and that's basically to understand
what data sources exist, understand where the gaps are,
and then what sort of, uh, actions you need to take
to address those gaps
to ensure you have an adequate understanding, um,
of different aspects of those population
and the barriers that they face, um,
with interacting with society.
Another example might be in the homelessness
and, uh, transient people space.
Now we measure severe housing deprivation,
or we have done out of the census as it been traditionally,
um, conducted.
And I guess when you look around, uh,
different international jurisdictions
and even some, I guess, local authorities around, uh,
New Zealand too, um, I guess there's an idea
of point in time, street count of, um, people
who are say rough sleeping or in sleeping in cars.
And so I guess there are questions around
how does Stat Z collaborate with the likes of the Ministry
of Housing and Urban Development and other agencies
and I guess local bodies too, to, um, advance
that sort of collection.
So we understand, um, that that population for,
for policy purposes.
So that, that would be, um, another example.
So Sean, thank you.
Um, we are very interested
and we only have nine more minutes, so I'm going
to hand over to, um, Jan for a new primary.
And, and I think you've just touched on this,
but I just wanna explore it a bit deeper.
And we're talking about going from the descriptive
of the statistics, more the differential approach
around pulling the hypothesis together of, of the data
and testing that to develop the programs.
That's what you're talking about.
So the programs are based on your hypothesis
and then your modeling of the statistics
and what government program
Are based on. So
you're saying, uh,
what is informing our tailored solutions?
Yeah, basically, Yeah.
I guess you, you do wanna look at what, um, I guess
wicked policy problems exist, um, that government is,
is facing at present.
Um, but you also want to, I think, I guess
engage in collaborative design with data experts
and stakeholders from those communities to understand
what their data needs and aspirations are.
'cause they might be different to, uh, policy problems, um,
that I guess government is focused on.
I guess the trick is that you can't solve all of those.
Mm-hmm. You know, you've gotta work through, um,
what is gonna create most value to your, um,
official statistics system and government data system,
and know that you're working with, uh,
those communities in iwi Maori over
quite a long period of time.
We're not looking to work with them just through until 2030,
but over a 10 plus year horizon.
So you've got, I think, a longer runway to,
um, work towards what their, um,
I guess work towards addressing their unmet need.
So, added to that, can I just ask,
and I've always been curious around this, how does
that match up with our longitudinal studies that we have
as well, the growing up in New Zealand
and the Dunedin study, which are some of the best around,
how does the statistics gathering
and capturing, do you work alongside those
or have that integration between both?
Maybe I should jump in on that one.
So I think both of those longitudal studies,
the purpose is really to capture
extremely rich information about a relatively small number
of people, kind of a thousand people in the Dunedin study,
and maybe six
or 7,000 in the case of growing up in New Zealand.
The statistics, you know, the IDI, so the kind of capture
of data for this is that we're talking about here,
we're looking to capture a smaller amount
of information about everybody in the country.
So, um, currently neither of those surveys in the IDI
to need to say probably may never be, um,
growing up in New Zealand, there are advanced talks about
bringing it in so that you could link
those two sources together.
But I think the scale of them is quite different
and the degree of detail is also a difference.
So they, they serve different purposes.
I think also, um, the analytical need
that you articulated there is exactly,
and it does sort of go into, um, the,
the needs in social investment
and being able to look at outcomes for people
and ensure that our people are, are receiving, um,
what they need and we're getting positive outcomes.
That's exactly why, um,
ensuring we've got the data we need in a census context is
so important because it, not only does it use get used
for policy and counting the population
and understanding where we're all are,
but it also gets used in the analytical sense
As well. Yeah. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank you. I'll hand it over to Dana.
Oh, sorry. Asia, did you have a question as well? Danna?
Um, and just a reminder that Yeah.
About, um, outcomes for Maori. Yes. Danna. Yes.
Um, yes.
Uh, my question is just a bit more about the
reporting side of it.
Uh, and I mean, we live in a pretty fast paced world now
where we all want access to information immediately.
Um, and the five year census data timeframe was always kind
of, you know, but drawn out by the time we get
to year five year completely don't
believe anything of it anymore.
So I'm just interested in how, um, the new approach
and particularly, um, around, um, the information for Maori,
um, will deliver a more real time more, um, annualized.
Um, what does that look like for us as with, you know,
access to, to data stats.
So, uh, I think from 2030 we're gonna have, uh,
census data and statistics produced annually.
Right? Great. And so
Happy Days from 2030.
Yeah. Subject to
Yeah. Changes
going through. Yeah.
'cause I think if you look at Data and Statistics Act now,
um, and we didn't have those changes go through,
we'd be doing census in 2028. Sure.
Speak up a Bit, please. I beg your pardon.
Well just speak up. Yeah.
So from 2030, we're seeking to have census data
and statistics produced annually.
Yes. Um,
and I, when you're looking at admin data,
when you're looking at, um,
I guess a continuous census attribute survey, uh, the,
it's inherently flexible, right?
So you can change content each year.
You can have, uh, rotating modules
or questions coming off that do,
that do slightly deeper dives into different topics if
that's housing quality,
or to understand some of those priority communities
that I mentioned earlier.
Um, and so yeah, this, this model, um,
I think looks to break down.
Um, you know, what,
what was quite a rigid system when you're looking at that,
that five year, uh, traditional approach to, to census.
Um, and I think within the census data
and statistics that we'll produce,
you'd have the topics like Maori descent, uh,
iwi affiliation, um, and, and so forth, right?
So that, so we are looking
to produce statistics across your, your typical units of,
uh, individuals, households, families, um, extended families
and, and those sorts of things.
Great. Thank you. Thank you.
Um, we have three more minutes,
and if you don't mind, there is a question, um, Simon, your
introductory corridor, um, you were talking about
with the stages of the integrated data infrastructure, um,
there's a point at which you said where
and when to intervene to stop poor outcomes.
Um, are you able in two minutes to, to,
to maybe give an example or how that works in practice?
Um, or how you would envisage or you can,
or you can write an
Answer. I can give an example
actually.
So, um, one thing I would say is
that at stats we are the managers of the infrastructure.
We bring the data together, we try and ensure the quality.
And then largely it's other people, researchers,
government departments who do the kind of work, uh,
that you're talking about there, that, you know,
identifying the intervention points
and then trying to figure out
what programs would actually help.
Um, so just to give you one example though,
there is a program called YS Neat, which is about, um,
basically youth who are not in
education, employment training.
Um, so treasury had used the IDR to evaluate, um,
and found that whilst the program was popular
and well funded, it wasn't effectively
targeting the right youth.
And so it wasn't achieving the outcomes it might be.
And so, um, having found those insights, they, uh, then used
that information to work with, um, not sure which agency,
but the agency that was running the program to redesign it,
to try and make sure that, um, the interventions were going
to the people who really needed it rather than
perhaps a broader group of people.
So that's just the type of thing that, um, you know,
through staged analysis
and then working with people who design services
that you can get better outcomes using the start. Yep.
Thank you very much. We are, um, close rung out
of time if there's any quick, uh,
questions from my colleagues.
Otherwise, I wanna thank you very much, um, for the detail
and also putting the detail in a way that, um, is, is easy
for a lot of us to understand, um, as well our listeners,
um, thank you very much.
We'll take on board this important information.
If we have any further questions,
we'll send them by writing.
Um, have a great day
and to all our listeners, we are going to, um, now, uh,
but um, thanks for tuning in.
Thank you very much.